Draft: v2 migration guide with examples (#1732)
stac-utils/pystac: docs/migration-guide.md

# Migration Guide: PySTAC v1 to v2

> This guide helps you migrate your PySTAC code from v1.x to v2.0. PySTAC v2.0 is a ground-up rewrite that changes how you read, write, and work with STAC catalogs. While the core data structure APIs remain familiar, **there are significant breaking changes** you need to address.

Reviewer: It'd be good to link to https://stac-utils.github.io/pystac/pystac-v2.0/ in this line.

## What's Different

The key differences between v1 and v2 are:

- **`CatalogType` is removed** - use explicit boolean arguments instead

> - **`StacIO` is replaced** with `Reader` and `Writer` classes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **`StacIO` is deprecated** in favor of with `Reader` and `Writer` classes
```

> - **Reading methods move to classes** - `pystac.read_file()` becomes `Item.from_file()`, etc.

Reviewer: I think we'll still want to keep the top level `pystac.read_file` helper function, so this line should god away.

- **Collection is no longer a Catalog subclass** - both inherit from `Container` instead
- **Href handling is explicit** - `normalize_hrefs()` must be called before serialization

> - **No auto-mutation on read** - data is not modified when loading

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **No auto-mutation on read** - data is not modified when loading, other than casting it to the appropriate type or doing simple fixes to ensure valid STAC
```

- **Assets require keyword arguments** - only `href` is positional
- **Extents have stricter structure**

## V1 to V2 migration examples

### CatalogType is Removed

**What changed:** The `CatalogType` enum no longer exists. Href behavior is now controlled with explicit boolean arguments.

**v1:**
```python
from pystac import Catalog, CatalogType

catalog = Catalog("my-catalog", "A catalog")
catalog.normalize_hrefs("./catalog")
catalog.save(CatalogType.SELF_CONTAINED)  # or CatalogType.ABSOLUTE
```

**v2:**
```python
catalog = Catalog("my-catalog", "A catalog")
catalog.normalize_hrefs("./catalog")
catalog.save(use_absolute_hrefs=False, include_self_href=True)
```

With this change, `CatalogType.SELF_CONTAINED` is equivalent to `use_absolute_hrefs=False`.
`CatalogType.ABSOLUTE` is equivalent to `use_absolute_hrefs=True`.
`CatalogType.RELATIVE` is equivalent to `use_absolute_hrefs=False, include_self_href=False`.

> Additionally, the `save()` method no longer requires `catalog_type` - it's inferred from the normalize_hrefs call.

Reviewer: It'd be good to have a table showing the mapping from `CatalogType` to the arguments, e.g.

| CatalogType | use_absolute_hrefs | include_self_href |
| -- | -- | -- |
| SELF_CONTANED | False | True |
| ABSOLUTE | True | True |
| RELATIVE | False | False |

### StacIO is Replaced with Reader and Writer

> **What changed:** The `StacIO` class is replaced by separate `Reader` and `Writer` classes. Reading is now a method on objects rather than a top-level function.

Reviewer: We should be explicit that `StacIO` isn't removed, it's deprecated.

catalog.save()
```

### Assets Now Require Keyword Arguments

**What changed:** In v1, `Asset` could accept multiple positional arguments. In v2, only `href` is positional—all other parameters must be passed as keyword arguments.

**v1:**
```python
from pystac import Item, Asset

item = Item("item-1")
# Could pass multiple positional arguments:
asset = Asset("data.tif", "image/tiff", "Data", "Raster data")
item.add_asset("data", asset)
```

**v2:**
```python
from pystac import Item, Asset

item = Item("item-1")
# Only href is positional, everything else must be keyword arguments:
asset = Asset(
    href="data.tif",
    media_type="image/tiff",
    title="Data",
    description="Raster data",
    roles=["data"],
)
item.add_asset("data", asset)
```

### Extents: Spatial and Temporal Structures Changed

**What changed:** In v1, `Extent` had nested `SpatialExtent` and `TemporalExtent` classes with specific property patterns. In v2, these structures are more explicitly defined with stricter typing and validation.

**v1:**
```python
from pystac import Collection, SpatialExtent, TemporalExtent
from datetime import datetime

> # v1: Used convenience constructors

Reviewer: I don't see any reason we can't keep the convince constructors in v2, if they're not present it's not an intentional remove.

spatial = SpatialExtent.from_coordinates(0, 0, 1, 1)
temporal = TemporalExtent.from_now()

> collection = Collection("col-1", "A collection")

Reviewer: This example looks broken, we don't use the extents.
